Nishant Velagapudi
INFO 474
Data Exploration with D3

URL: http://nishray.github.io/Info474DataExploration/

The purpose of this visualization is to allow users to understand the pricing of treatment of different categories of treatment in different cities. I chose a bar chart to compare the average prices of medical procedures (grouped by diagnosis related group code) in large Washington cities. The bar chart was the best choice in this situation because accuracy in decoding the presented numerical information was important. High level domain specific abstract tasks will likely include comparisons between various cities in terms of prices: thus, using the most accurate elementary perceptual task (comparison along a common scale) allows us to answer these probable questions with optimal accuracy.

My controls allow for the user to select a diagnosis related group code as well as a price to compare. There are three potential prices to look at in this data: the average cost covered by insurance, the average total payment, and the average medicare payment. Comparing one of these categories to another is not really relevant and would lead to erroneous conclusions about the prices issued by these providers. Therefore, my first control is aimed at bucketing these different prices. This separation allows users to come to accurate conclusions about treatment pricing in each of the three categories and allows users to ask three different questions about the pricing of each treatment group. This provides a degree of context when evaluating city treatment pricing. For example, we can see that the average total payment for DRG code 064 (intracranial hemorrhage or cerebral infarction w/ MCC) is the most in Seattle. This could wrongly lead us to believe that head injuries are very expensive in Seattle. However, we can see that the average medicare payment for this same DRG code is the highest by a significant margin as well. Therefore, it is likely that many elderly in the dataset have suffered this kind of injury in Seattle: there might be increased treatment and rehabilitation cost due to their advanced age. This context is important in coming to reasonable conclusions.

My second control allows users to select a DRG code. DRG codes group similar treatments together. Comparing prices from different DRG codes would be misleading: the user would not get an accurate sense of relative performance. Therefore, splitting the treatment pricing comparison by city on the basis of type of treatment provided is a fairly intuitive feature. Additionally, one major question that users would want to ask is where to seek treatment for a particular kind of ailment. By differentiating the pricing charts by DRG code, users can isolate which cities are cheapest to seek treatment for each ailment group. If I were seeking treatment for hypertension (blood pressure), I would want to see what the costs looked like for DRG code 305 (Hypertension w/o MCC). Within this category, I could use the first control to come to a couple of different conclusions. First, the average total payment is highest in Seattle. Second, insurance covers the greatest payment in Tacoma, but the average medicare payment is highest in Seattle.